README.md, before:

# aca_health

## overview

Create datawarehouse, from raw to semantic layer, to serve as foundation for cost analyzer.

[Data Dictionary](https://garthmortensen.github.io/aca_health/).

## Execution

### create health insurance seed data

- Generate seed data:
  - members
  - plans
  - providers
  - claims and enrollments

`python ./scripts/generate_seed_data.py`

### create database and read seeds

- launch database
- define schema on load, with data dictionary

`docker compose -f infrastructure/docker/docker-compose.yml up`

## Load Staging Data

- Load seed CSVs into staging tables 1:1.
- No transforms — just type coercion + basic validation.
- Track load batch metadata:
  - `load_id`
  - `load_timestamp`

`python scripts/staging_loader.py`

## transform

Use dbt to perform all transformations including stage, star-schema analytics mart, summary tables, data cubes and semantic layer.

Install dbt package dependencies:

```bash
dbt deps
```

Run snapshots (captures SCD2 changes for members / plans / providers):

```bash
dbt snapshot
```

Build everything (models + tests).

```bash
dbt build
# or separate:
dbt run
dbt test
```

Gen docs:

```bash
dbt docs generate
dbt docs serve  # opens a local web server
```

Produce single-file static docs for GitHub Pages

```bash
python make_static_docs.py
```

Select executions:

```bash
dbt run --select staging

dbt run --select mart
```

`dbt build` is the one command to materialize all layers + tests.

## Tools

- Containerization: Docker + docker-compose
- Packaging: uv
- Transform modeling: dbt
- Data QA: dbt_expectations (Great Expectations)
- data creation: faker
- linting: Ruff, SQLFluff

## Schema ERDs

## Staging

```mermaid
erDiagram
  staging_claims_raw ||--o{ staging_members_raw : "member_id"
  staging_claims_raw }o--|| staging_providers_raw : "provider_id"
  staging_claims_raw }o--|| staging_plans_raw : "plan_id"
  staging_enrollments_raw ||--|| staging_members_raw : "member_id"
  staging_enrollments_raw }o--|| staging_plans_raw : "plan_id"
```

- Cardinality marks: `||` (one), `o{` (many optional).

## Mart (curated dims & facts)

```mermaid
erDiagram
  mart_dim_member ||--o{ mart_fct_claim : "member_id"
  mart_dim_provider ||--o{ mart_fct_claim : "provider_id"
  mart_dim_plan ||--o{ mart_fct_claim : "plan_id"
  mart_dim_member ||--o{ mart_fct_enrollment : "member_id"
  mart_dim_plan ||--o{ mart_fct_enrollment : "plan_id"
  mart_dim_date ||--o{ mart_fct_claim : "claim_date"
  mart_dim_date ||--o{ mart_fct_enrollment : "date_span" 
```

## Summary (aggs and cubes)

```mermaid
erDiagram
  mart_fct_claim ||--o{ summary_agg_claims_monthly : "source"
  mart_fct_claim ||--o{ summary_agg_plan_performance_cube : "source"
  mart_fct_claim ||--o{ summary_agg_provider_specialty_monthly_cube : "source"
  mart_fct_claim ||--o{ summary_agg_claims_diagnosis_summary_cube : "source"
  mart_fct_enrollment ||--o{ summary_agg_plan_performance_cube : "enrollment"
  mart_dim_member ||--o{ summary_agg_member_cost_cube : "member_attrs"
  summary_agg_member_cost_cube ||--o{ summary_agg_member_risk_stratification_cube : "derived"
  summary_agg_claims_monthly ||--|| summary_dashboard_summary : "metrics"
  summary_agg_member_cost_cube ||--|| summary_dashboard_summary : "metrics"
  summary_agg_provider_performance ||--|| summary_dashboard_summary : "metrics"
  summary_agg_provider_performance ||--o{ summary_agg_provider_specialty_monthly_cube : "rollup"
```

- `source` edges indicate aggregation lineage.
- `metrics feed` indicates inputs to composite dashboard view.
- `derived` indicates a second-level cube built from a first-level cube.

## End-to-end local workflow

The diagram shows: generate seeds → start Postgres → load staging → build/test with dbt → docs.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  A["Generate Seed Data (Python)"] -->|writes CSVs| B["data/seeds/*.csv"]
  click A href "scripts/generate_seed_data.py" _self
  click B href "data/seeds/" _self

  B --> C{"Docker up?"}
  C -- "No" --> D["Start Postgres\n(docker compose up -d)"]
  C -- "Yes" --> E["DB Healthy"]
  D --> E
  click D href "infrastructure/docker/docker-compose.yml" _self

  E --> F["Apply DDL on init\n(/infrastructure/sql/ddl)"]
  click F href "infrastructure/sql/ddl/01_staging_schema.sql" _self

  F --> G["Load seeds into staging\n(scripts/staging_loader.py)"]
  click G href "scripts/staging_loader.py" _self

  G --> H["dbt seed (optional)"]
  H --> I["dbt run (staging → dims/facts)"]
  I --> J["dbt test (quality checks)"]
  J --> K["dbt docs generate \n+ serve (optional)"]

  
```

### Typical commands

```bash
# 1 Generate synthetic seeds (timestamped CSVs in data/seeds)
python3 scripts/generate_seed_data.py

# 2 Start Postgres (first run applies DDL automatically)
docker compose -f infrastructure/docker/docker-compose.yml up -d

# 3 Load the latest seed files into staging tables
python3 scripts/staging_loader.py

# 4 Build and validate with dbt
cd transform

# simple
dbt build

# piecemeal
dbt snapshot
dbt run
dbt test
dbt docs generate  # optional
```

## dbt profile setup

dbt looks for `~/.dbt/profiles.yml` by default. This repo includes a working profile at `transform/profiles/profiles.yml` named `aca_health` (matching `profile:` in `transform/dbt_project.yml`).

Set it up once globally:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.dbt
cp transform/profiles/profiles.yml ~/.dbt/profiles.yml
```

Validate the profile and connection:

```bash
cd transform
dbt debug
```

Commit message:

feat(schemas): add macro to ensure tables end up in correct schemas

README.md, after:

# aca_health

## overview

Create datawarehouse, from raw to semantic layer, to serve as foundation for cost analyzer.

[Data Dictionary](https://garthmortensen.github.io/aca_health/).

## Execution

### create health insurance seed data

- Generate seed data:
  - members
  - plans
  - providers
  - claims and enrollments

`python ./scripts/generate_seed_data.py`

### create database and read seeds

- launch database
- define schema on load, with data dictionary

`docker compose -f infrastructure/docker/docker-compose.yml up`

## Load Staging Data

- Load seed CSVs into staging tables 1:1.
- No transforms — just type coercion + basic validation.
- Track load batch metadata:
  - `load_id`
  - `load_timestamp`

`python scripts/staging_loader.py`


## transform

Use dbt to perform all transformations including stage, star-schema analytics mart, summary tables, data cubes and semantic layer.

### Data Models

Models are organized into the following schemas:

Install dbt package dependencies:

```bash
dbt deps
```

Run snapshots (captures SCD2 changes for members / plans / providers):

```bash
dbt snapshot
```

Build everything (models + tests).

```bash
dbt build
# or separate:
dbt run
dbt test
```

Gen docs:

```bash
dbt docs generate
dbt docs serve  # opens a local web server
```

Produce single-file static docs for GitHub Pages

```bash
python make_static_docs.py
```

Select executions:

```bash
dbt run --select staging

dbt run --select mart
```

`dbt build` is the one command to materialize all layers + tests.

## Tools

- Containerization: Docker + docker-compose
- Packaging: uv
- Transform modeling: dbt
- Data QA: dbt_expectations (Great Expectations)
- data creation: faker
- linting: Ruff, SQLFluff

## Schema ERDs

## Staging

```mermaid
erDiagram
  staging_claims_raw ||--o{ staging_members_raw : "member_id"
  staging_claims_raw }o--|| staging_providers_raw : "provider_id"
  staging_claims_raw }o--|| staging_plans_raw : "plan_id"
  staging_enrollments_raw ||--|| staging_members_raw : "member_id"
  staging_enrollments_raw }o--|| staging_plans_raw : "plan_id"
```

- Cardinality marks: `||` (one), `o{` (many optional).

## Mart (curated dims & facts)

```mermaid
erDiagram
  mart_dim_member ||--o{ mart_fct_claim : "member_id"
  mart_dim_provider ||--o{ mart_fct_claim : "provider_id"
  mart_dim_plan ||--o{ mart_fct_claim : "plan_id"
  mart_dim_member ||--o{ mart_fct_enrollment : "member_id"
  mart_dim_plan ||--o{ mart_fct_enrollment : "plan_id"
  mart_dim_date ||--o{ mart_fct_claim : "claim_date"
  mart_dim_date ||--o{ mart_fct_enrollment : "date_span" 
```

## Summary (aggs and cubes)

```mermaid
erDiagram
  mart_fct_claim ||--o{ summary_agg_claims_monthly : "source"
  mart_fct_claim ||--o{ summary_agg_plan_performance_cube : "source"
  mart_fct_claim ||--o{ summary_agg_provider_specialty_monthly_cube : "source"
  mart_fct_claim ||--o{ summary_agg_claims_diagnosis_summary_cube : "source"
  mart_fct_enrollment ||--o{ summary_agg_plan_performance_cube : "enrollment"
  mart_dim_member ||--o{ summary_agg_member_cost_cube : "member_attrs"
  summary_agg_member_cost_cube ||--o{ summary_agg_member_risk_stratification_cube : "derived"
  summary_agg_claims_monthly ||--|| summary_dashboard_summary : "metrics"
  summary_agg_member_cost_cube ||--|| summary_dashboard_summary : "metrics"
  summary_agg_provider_performance ||--|| summary_dashboard_summary : "metrics"
  summary_agg_provider_performance ||--o{ summary_agg_provider_specialty_monthly_cube : "rollup"
```

- `source` edges indicate aggregation lineage.
- `metrics feed` indicates inputs to composite dashboard view.
- `derived` indicates a second-level cube built from a first-level cube.

## End-to-end local workflow

The diagram shows: generate seeds → start Postgres → load staging → build/test with dbt → docs.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
  A["Generate Seed Data (Python)"] -->|writes CSVs| B["data/seeds/*.csv"]
  click A href "scripts/generate_seed_data.py" _self
  click B href "data/seeds/" _self

  B --> C{"Docker up?"}
  C -- "No" --> D["Start Postgres\n(docker compose up -d)"]
  C -- "Yes" --> E["DB Healthy"]
  D --> E
  click D href "infrastructure/docker/docker-compose.yml" _self

  E --> F["Apply DDL on init\n(/infrastructure/sql/ddl)"]
  click F href "infrastructure/sql/ddl/01_staging_schema.sql" _self

  F --> G["Load seeds into staging\n(scripts/staging_loader.py)"]
  click G href "scripts/staging_loader.py" _self

  G --> H["dbt seed (optional)"]
  H --> I["dbt run (staging → dims/facts)"]
  I --> J["dbt test (quality checks)"]
  J --> K["dbt docs generate \n+ serve (optional)"]

  
```

### Typical commands

```bash
# 1 Generate synthetic seeds (timestamped CSVs in data/seeds)
python3 scripts/generate_seed_data.py

# 2 Start Postgres (first run applies DDL automatically)
docker compose -f infrastructure/docker/docker-compose.yml up -d

# 3 Load the latest seed files into staging tables
python3 scripts/staging_loader.py

# 4 Build and validate with dbt
cd transform

# simple
dbt build

# piecemeal
dbt snapshot
dbt run
dbt test
dbt docs generate  # optional
```

## dbt profile setup

dbt looks for `~/.dbt/profiles.yml` by default. This repo includes a working profile at `transform/profiles/profiles.yml` named `aca_health` (matching `profile:` in `transform/dbt_project.yml`).

Set it up once globally:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.dbt
cp transform/profiles/profiles.yml ~/.dbt/profiles.yml
```

Validate the profile and connection:

```bash
cd transform
dbt debug
```
